Understanding the time complexities and how you can derive time complexities is super important and
it definitely takes some practice.
So if you're not fully on board yet and if you're not sure you can do this for every algorithm you write
on your own that's fine we'll also see our examples in this module.
I want to come back to one important thing here though and that is that we of course can also have a
look at different cases.
When we arrived execution time or the number of operations that are performed let's take this Gedmin
function here for example I mentioned that this year Indiana has a constant execution time and so does
the return statement and this loop here is N minus one or four large ends.
So for large arrays we get here.
It's actually just and we could say now of course we also have different cases we can look at though.
For example here we could say we have a best case which is that we get an array with just one element
or with no element at all.
In this case we have only one operation that is executed ever does if statement if it's an empty array
and we get this error or is simply this line and this line so two lines that are executed but they each
run only once and hence we don't make it into this loop at all this loop would not execute at all if
we have just one element.
So that's the best case here we could say we actually have not 0.
And so we don't have linear time but 0 1 something which is called constant time constant time because
our function and the code in there will only execute once there is not a single line in that entire
function which would execute more than once for such an array of course we have multiple lines that
are running we have this line and this line and this if check which executes but they each run only
once not multiple times.
So that would be our best case our worst case.
On the other hand would be that we have an array with at least two elements like 3 and one.
And of course the longer it is the longer it takes.
But this is the case already where all our code in the end executes at least once.
So this is a case where we end up with 0 and in the end no matter if we have two elements or a million
elements we need to touch every code and this four loop will also run at least once.
It will basically run as often as we have elements in our array we can always have a look at the cases
in our second function here.
They're our best case would be that we have an ordered array so that we get something like this.
We would still execute both loops in here.
So we still in the end end up with quadratic time but at least this if statement in here does not execute
a single time.
So these lines will never execute.
If the array we get is already ordered so we would have quadratic time nonetheless.
But if we have a look at the entire code in detail it's a bit better than our worst case where all the
code and the if statement is executed because here our worst case is that we have an array that is sorted
in the other direction.
That means we execute this code in the if statement as often as possible.
If we have a look at a large quantity of items we still end up with quadratic time though because the
worst part is that the for loops run all the time and that's the case no matter how it is ordered.
But we run even a bit more code than in the best case we don't see it here in the Big O notation because
we don't care about these constant parts.
But still it is a bit worse than the best case.
But what I just said is important.
We don't care about the small details like this code in the if statement.
We care about the big things and that mainly means about loops in our code.
We care about the average case.
You could say and that of course is the case where we simply don't know what we're getting where the
input is not known in advance because that is the standard case we have to care about.
Typically we don't know which input we get.
And in that average case this code in here might maybe run two or three or five times or not at all.
We don't know.
That's why does average case matters for us where we actually have the Big O notation and where we ignore
these constant factors but instead where we count the big chunks like the for loops here which run over
and over again.
So it's always the average case that matters for us not the worst case where we have basically the average
case plus some extra executions of the if statement or the best case where we have the average case
minus some extra executions we don't care about that because we can't anticipate it any ways we care
about the average case here and the average case really is about the big chunks.
So the big four lose for example and not some if statements where we simply don't know whether they
will execute or not.
So we don't count this in we care about the average case.